Cholas

Introduction
The Cholas who ruled from the ninth century to thirteenth century CE (850 – 1279 CE)
played a very important part in the political and cultural history of South India. The core
region of their control- Cholamandalam - was the area around Tanjore upto East Coast, the
Coromandal of later times. The Chola period of south Indian history with its impressive
corpus of inscriptions has been widely discussed in recent years. There have been diverse
theories and many new interpretations drew less on political authority and more on
institutions established at this time, together with the articulations of cultural forms. The
standards established in society, religion and fine arts during this period were regarded as
classical and came to dominate the patterns of the living in the south and also influenced and
modified at certain levels in the patterns existing elsewhere in Peninsula. There was also an
active intervention in south-east Asia to a greater degree than before, in the commerce and in
its cultural forms.

Early Cholas
The Cholas, as rulers, are known to have existed from remote antiquity. They are mentioned,
for the first time in II and XIII Rock Edicts of Ashoka along with the Pandyas and Cheras.
According to this inscription the Cholas were a friendly power in the south beyond the pale of
Mauryan Suzerainty. The Sangam literature also furnishes much on Chola chiefdoms.
Karikala Chola was the greatest early Chola king. He is credited with the foundation of the
city of Puhar at the mouth of river Cauvery and with the construction of an embankment
along that river. He also showed much interest in the land reclamation and in improving the
irrigational facilities. Though Chola kings are known from the Mauryan period, their postSangam history is unclear, as is their connection with the Cholas of early medieval times.
Imperial Cholas
The founder and first king of the Imperial Chola dynasty of Tanjore was Vijayalaya (850 871 CE) He established his power in the area around Uraiyur, captured Tanjore from the
Muttaraiyar chieftains, an ally of the Pandyas and extended his kingdom along the lower
Kaveri. Vijayalaya accepted the over lordship of Pallavas and began his rule around 850 CE.
Vijayalaya is credited with founding of the temple of Nishumbhasudini.
Aditya I (871-907)
The successor of Vijayalaya, achieved significant military successes and expanded the Chola
kingdom. He defeated the last Pallava overlord Aparajita in 893. This victory gave him
control over Tondamandalam. Thereafter, he went on to conquer Kongudesa (Corresponding
to Coimbatore and Salem) from the Pandyas. He also claims to have captured Talakad,

capital of the Western Gangas. Aditya I entered into matrimonial alliance with the Pallavas
by marrying Pallava princess.

Parantaka I (907 - 953 CE)
The first important ruler of the Chola dynasty, Parantaka I, came to power and ruled almost
half a century. He was considered the real founder of the Chola empire in south India. He
secured the northern frontier of the kingdom by campaigning against the Pandyas and
capturing their capital Madurai after which he assumed the title of ‘Maduraikonda’
(Conqueror of Madurai). Rajasimha, the Pandyan ruler who faced defeat at the hands of
Parantaka, left his kingdom and took shelter in the court of the Ceylonese king. He defeated
the combined forces of the Pandyas and the king of Srilanka in the battle of Vellur, and the
Pandyan territories fell into Chola hands. During the closing years of Parantaka I, the
Rashtrakuta king Krishna III defeated Parantaka in the famous battle of Takkolam near
Arkonam in 949 CE and succeeded in occupying the large part of the northern half of the
Chola empire.
Parantaka I was a great builder of temples. He also provided the Vimana of the famous
Nataraja temple at Chidambaram with a golden roof. The two famous Uttarameruru
inscriptions that give a detailed account of the village administration under the Cholas belong
to his reign. After the death of Parantaka 953 CE the history of Cholas for the next three
decades in which a succession of weak kings brought about a decline in the power of the
Cholas.
The Chola power was firmly established with the accession of Rajaraja I and his son and
successor Rajendra I, which allowed about half a century for the Chola kingdom to
beconsolidated and stabilized.
Rajaraja I (985 CE – 1014 CE)
The Chola power reached its peak during the reign of Arumolivarman, who assumed the title
Rajaraja I on his accession to thrown. It was he who laid the foundation of a mighty empire
and also provided an excellent administrative set up to it. He was the son of Parantaka II.
His military campaigns and the regions occupied and annexed into his empire are recorded
in his Tanjore inscriptions.

